
## LoadDefaultValues
### November 25, 2018

Powertrain and fuels data are some of the most complex datasets used in VisionEval models to develop. To simplify matters for the user, default datasets are included in the package and are processed when the package is built. The user can then work with a simpler set of input files to develop scenarios. Documentation for the *Initialize* module describes the user inputs in detail. Although this simplifies model applications, it does constrain the powertrain and fuel factors that the average user can vary in scenarios. It is anticipated that this limitation will diminish over time as sufficiently knowledgeable users develop variants of the VEPowertrainsAndFuels package that include different default datasets. For example, one package may include data files representing a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario while another package represents a California zero-emissions vehicle (ZEV) rules scenario. A different default scenario can be made by altering files in the `inst/extdata` directory of the source package. Each file is documented with a correspondingly named text file. Following are brief descriptions of each of the default datasets:

* **carbon_intensity.csv**: This file includes values for the carbon intensity of motor vehicle fuels and electricity by fuel type. Carbon intensity is measured in grams of carbon dioxide equivalents per megajoule of energy. Note that the carbon intensity values may be well-to-wheels or tank-to-wheels estimates/forecasts. Well-to-wheels values include the carbon emissions to produce and transport the fuels as well as the emissions that result from using the fuels. Tank-to-wheels values only include the carbon emissions resulting from using the fuels. If the estimates are tank-to-wheels, the 'Electricity' values would be zero. VE-RSPM and VE-State models are almost always run with well-to-wheels values as this provides a more complete assessment of the effects of transportation decisions and provides a fairer assessment of the effects of electric vehicles which depends on the source of electric power. Data are provided by year for gasoline, diesel, compressed natural gas, liquified natural gas, ethanol, biodiesel, renewable natural gas, and electricity.

* **carsvc_fuel.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used to power car service vehicles by fuel type (gasoline, diesel, compressed natural gas) and vehicle type (auto, light truck). Note that these include fuel blends (e.g. gasoline blended with ethanol). Blending proportions are specified in the "ldv_biofuel_mix.csv" file. The data in these files as well as in the "carbon_intensity.csv" file are used to calculate the average carbon intensity of hydrocarbon fuels used by car service vehicles. Note that the proportions in this file do **not** represent volumetric proportions (e.g. gallons), they represent energy proportions (e.g. gasoline gallon equivalents) or DVMT proportions.

* **carsvc_powertrain_prop.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of vehicle powertrain (ICEV, HEV, BEV) by vehicle type (auto, light truck) used by car services (e.g. taxi, TNC). The proportions represent the proportions of daily vehicle miles traveled (DVMT) rather than the proportions of vehicles. Note that the powertrain use proportions must add to 1 for each vehicle type. Also note that there is no category for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV). The reason for this is that the model has no built-in mechanism for determining the proportion of PHEV travel which is powered by electricity vs. the proportion of travel powered by fuel.

* **comsvc_fuel.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used to power commercial service vehicles by fuel type (gasoline, diesel, compressed natural gas) and vehicle type (auto, light truck). Note that these include fuel blends (e.g. gasoline blended with ethanol). Blending proportions are specified in the "ldv_biofuel_mix.csv" file. The data in these files as well as in the "carbon_intensity.csv" file are used to calculate the average carbon intensity of hydrocarbon fuels used by commercial service vehicles. Note that the proportions in this file do **not** represent volumetric proportions (e.g. gallons), they represent energy proportions (e.g. gasoline gallon equivalents) or DVMT proportions.

* **comsvc_powertrain_prop.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of vehicle powertrain (ICEV, HEV, BEV) use by vehicle type (auto, light truck) used by commercial service vehicles (e.g. parcel delivery, contractor). The proportions represent the proportions of daily vehicle miles traveled (DVMT) rather than the proportions of vehicles. Note that the powertrain use proportions must add to 1 for each vehicle type. Also note that there is no category for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV). The reason for this is that the model has no built-in mechanism for determining the proportion of PHEV travel which is powered by electricity vs. the proportion of travel powered by fuel.

* **congestion_efficiency.csv**: This file contains values for the relative 'fuel efficiency' of different vehicle powertrains in congestion. The impact of congestion on vehicle fuel economy was modeled for 145 vehicle configurations using the Environmental Protection Agency's PERE model (Alex Bigazzi and Kelly Clifton. Refining GreenSTEP: Impacts of Vehicle Technologies and ITS/Operational Improvements on Travel Speed and Fuel Consumption Curves. Final Report on Task 1: Advanced Vehicle Fuel-Speed Curves, November 2011, Portland State University). The vehicle configurations that perform 'best' and 'worst' in congestion were identified for 4 light-duty vehicle powertrains and one heavy duty vehicle powertrain. The congestion efficiency values in this file identify assumptions about the average congestion performance of each powertrain relative to the 'best' and 'worst' values. The values can range from 0 to 1 where 0 means that it is the 'worst' performance, 1 means that it is the 'best' performance, and 0.5 is midway between.

* **hh_fuel.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used to power household vehicles by fuel type (gasoline, diesel, compressed natural gas) and vehicle type (auto, light truck). Note that these include fuel blends (e.g. gasoline blended with ethanol). Blending proportions are specified in the "ldv_biofuel_mix.csv" file. The data in these files as well as in the "carbon_intensity.csv" file are used to calculate the average carbon intensity of hydrocarbon fuels used by household vehicles. Note that the proportions in this file do not represent volumetric proportions (e.g. gallons), they represent energy proportions (e.g. gasoline gallon equivalents) or DVMT proportions.

* **hh_powertrain_prop.csv**: This file contains values for household vehicle powertrain (ICEV, HEV, PHEV, BEV) proportions by vehicle type (auto, light truck), and vehicle model year. Note that the powertrain use proportions need add to 1 for each vehicle type.

* **hvytrk_biofuel_mix.csv**: This file contains values for the biofuel proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used by heavy trucks. For example if the gasoline used by heavy trucks is 5% ethanol, the ethanol proportion of gasoline (EthanolPropGasoline) would be 0.05.

* **hvytrk_fuel.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used to power heavy trucks by fuel type (gasoline, diesel, liquified natural gas). Note that these include fuel blends (e.g. gasoline blended with ethanol). Blending proportions are specified in the "hvytrk_biofuel_mix.csv" file. The data in these files as well as in the "carbon_intensity.csv" file are used to calculate the average carbon intensity of hydrocarbon fuels used by heavy trucks. Note that the proportions in this file do **not** represent volumetric proportions (e.g. gallons), they represent energy proportions (e.g. gasoline gallon equivalents) or DVMT proportions.

* **hvytrk_powertrain_characteristics.csv**: This file contains values for key powertrain characteristics for the heavy truck fleet that are used in calculating amounts of fuel and electric power consumed.

* **hvytrk_powertrain_prop.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of vehicle powertrain (ICEV, HEV, BEV) use by heavy trucks. The proportions represent the proportions of daily vehicle miles traveled (DVMT) rather than the proportions of vehicles. Note that the powertrain use proportions must add to 1 for each vehicle type. Also note that there is no category for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV). The reason for this is that the model has no built-in mechanism for determining the proportion of PHEV travel which is powered by electricity vs. the proportion of travel powered by fuel.

* **ldv_biofuel_mix.csv**: This file contains values for the biofuel proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used by light-duty vehicles. For example if the gasoline used by light-duty vehicles is 5% ethanol, the ethanol proportion of gasoline (EthanolPropGasoline) would be 0.05.

* **ldv_powertrain_characteristics.csv**: This file contains values for key powertrain characteristics for light-duty vehicles by vehicle model year that are used in calculating amounts of fuel and electric power consumed.

* **transit_biofuel_mix.csv**: This file contains values for the biofuel proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used by public transit vehicles. For example if the gasoline used by thes vehicles is on average is 5% ethanol, the ethanol proportion of gasoline (EthanolPropGasoline) would be 0.05.

* **transit_fuel.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of hydrocarbon fuels used to power transit vehicles by fuel type (gasoline, diesel, compressed natural gas) and vehicle type (van, bus, rail). Note that these include fuel blends (e.g. gasoline blended with ethanol). Blending proportions are specified in the "transit_biofuel_mix.csv" file. The data in these files as well as in the "carbon_intensity.csv" file are used to calculate the average carbon intensity of hydrocarbon fuels used by transit vehicles. Note that the proportions in this file do **not** represent volumetric proportions (e.g. gallons), they represent energy proportions (e.g. gasoline gallon equivalents) or DVMT proportions.

* **transit_powertrain_characteristics.csv**: This file contains values for key powertrain characteristics for the public transit fleet vehicles that are used in calculating amounts of fuel and electric power consumed.

* **transit_powertrain_prop.csv**: This file contains values for the proportions of vehicle powertrain (ICEV, HEV, BEV) use by public transit vehicles. The proportions represent the proportions of daily vehicle miles traveled (DVMT) rather than the proportions of vehicles. Note that the powertrain use proportions must add to 1 for each vehicle type. Also note that there is no category for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV). The reason for this is that the model has no built-in mechanism for determining the proportion of PHEV travel which is powered by electricity vs. the proportion of travel powered by fuel.


## User Inputs
This module has no user input requirements.

## Datasets Used by the Module
This module uses no datasets that are in the datastore.

## Datasets Produced by the Module
This module produces no datasets to store in the datastore.
